src/assets/skill.md, before:

---
name: ctxhelpr
description: ALWAYS prefer ctxhelpr tools for code navigation when the repo is indexed. Use search_symbols instead of Grep for finding functions/classes/types. Use get_file_symbols instead of Read for understanding file structure. Use get_references instead of Grep for finding callers.
user-invocable: true
disable-model-invocation: false
allowed-tools: Bash
argument-hint: "[repo-path]"
---

## Context Helper - Semantic Code Navigation

IMPORTANT: When a repository is indexed, ALWAYS prefer ctxhelpr tools over
Grep/Glob/Read for code navigation tasks:
- Finding functions, classes, types -> use `search_symbols` (not Grep)
- Understanding a file's contents -> use `get_file_symbols` (not Read)
- Finding callers/usages -> use `get_references` (not Grep)
- Understanding project structure -> use `get_overview` (not Glob + Read)
- Inspecting a symbol -> use `get_symbol_detail` (not Read)

Reserve Grep/Glob/Read for non-code tasks: config files, text patterns, log messages.
Note: ctxhelpr only indexes files tracked by git (respects .gitignore). For
gitignored files (e.g. .env, build output, generated code), use Grep/Read instead.

### Startup workflow
Previously-indexed repos are automatically re-indexed when the MCP server starts,
so the index is always fresh. For new repos, call `index_repository` first.

1. Call `get_overview` for the big picture (modules, key types, entry points)
2. Drill into specific areas with `get_file_symbols` or `search_symbols`
3. Follow references with `get_symbol_detail`, `get_references`, `get_dependencies`

If the index seems off, use `/reindex` to force a full re-index.

### Output key legend
n=name k=kind f=file l=lines(start-end) id=symbol_id sig=signature doc=doc_comment p=path

### Tips
- Use symbol IDs to drill down (avoid re-searching)
- Start broad (overview), go narrow (symbol detail)
- The index stays fresh automatically — no manual update calls needed

Commit message:

Fixed first indexing issue (#40)
When the MCP is enabled and initiated on a new repo, the MCP doesn't
index by default, this causes the agent to throw an error and call the
index themselves, which is annoying and also inefficient (since the
indexing could be done in the background at start). These changes fixes
this.

src/assets/skill.md, after:

---
name: ctxhelpr
description: ALWAYS prefer ctxhelpr tools for code navigation when the repo is indexed. Use search_symbols instead of Grep for finding functions/classes/types. Use get_file_symbols instead of Read for understanding file structure. Use get_references instead of Grep for finding callers.
user-invocable: true
disable-model-invocation: false
allowed-tools: Bash
argument-hint: "[repo-path]"
---

## Context Helper - Semantic Code Navigation

IMPORTANT: When a repository is indexed, ALWAYS prefer ctxhelpr tools over
Grep/Glob/Read for code navigation tasks:
- Finding functions, classes, types -> use `search_symbols` (not Grep)
- Understanding a file's contents -> use `get_file_symbols` (not Read)
- Finding callers/usages -> use `get_references` (not Grep)
- Understanding project structure -> use `get_overview` (not Glob + Read)
- Inspecting a symbol -> use `get_symbol_detail` (not Read)

Reserve Grep/Glob/Read for non-code tasks: config files, text patterns, log messages.
Note: ctxhelpr only indexes files tracked by git (respects .gitignore). For
gitignored files (e.g. .env, build output, generated code), use Grep/Read instead.

### Startup workflow
Previously-indexed repos are automatically re-indexed when the MCP server starts.
New repos are auto-indexed on first tool call — no manual setup needed.

1. Call `get_overview` for the big picture (modules, key types, entry points)
2. Drill into specific areas with `get_file_symbols` or `search_symbols`
3. Follow references with `get_symbol_detail`, `get_references`, `get_dependencies`

If a repo hasn't been indexed yet, ctxhelpr will start background indexing and
return a message with options: call `index_repository` to wait, or use
Grep/Glob/Read as fallback tools.

If the index seems off, use `/reindex` to force a full re-index.

### Output key legend
n=name k=kind f=file l=lines(start-end) id=symbol_id sig=signature doc=doc_comment p=path

### Tips
- Use symbol IDs to drill down (avoid re-searching)
- Start broad (overview), go narrow (symbol detail)
- The index stays fresh automatically — no manual update calls needed
